uh thank you everybody uh welcome to the
town of Andover Board of Finance meeting
for Wednesday December 18th we go ahead
and call the meeting to order and recite
the Pledge of Allegiance I pledge
allegiance to the flag of the United
States of America to the to the Republic
for which it stands nation under God
indivisible Li and justice for all
thank you um first item we have is
public speak looks like the only member
of the public we have is Jerry CR Jerry
do you have anything to um address I'm
just to keep you company and let you
keep me
company I couldn't is that no no thank
you okay thanks yeah some background
this okay we'll move on to changes or
additions to the agenda it's anybody
have any proposed changes or additions
to the
agenda Mark were you did you see the
email from Caitlyn Greenhouse that can
you hear me yep yep okay um she sent us
an email asking us to talk about the MEP
for the um the bathroom project at um
the ele
school yeah and that's not on any of
this uh
yeah okay I mean I think we should add
it to the agenda to discuss it I mean we
have a lot of topics that I you know
will touch on but we should we should
add that to the
agenda okay you want to make a motion
then to add it to the agenda we probably
put it under new business 6C or we can
put it anywhere in between somewhere
yeah I'll make the motion to um add the
I don't I don't know the exact word but
add the add an agenda item to discuss
the MEP that was sent to us by the chair
person of the Board of Ed um for funding
on the
um oh SW O'Neal B and O'Neal M MEP um
regarding the bathroom project at the
elementary
school can I ask a quick question yep
was it sent to all of
us no doesn't look like it okay because
I was looking in my emails and I
couldn't find it thanks
yeah she does you know when we talk
about it it she does address and send
kind of a memo to the board of Finance
we just received it yesterday she knew
that the um agenda had already been set
but because of discussions at the um tri
board meeting we kind of knew this was
forthcoming so
yeah yeah I just forwarded it to all of
you thanks Mark just got it
yeah sorry about that no worries if it
was today I mean I understand
well yesterday afternoon but that's all
right yeah I
mean all right so Joanne uh is proposing
or is moved that we add a discussion of
the board of EDS uh request over the MP
fussen O'Neal uh project as item 6 C
under new business is that correct
Joanne correct okay I'll second that oh
do we need a second
yeah yeah we
should any
discussion okay all those in favor say I
any
opposed any
abstentions okay hearing none the motion
passes thank you we'll add that as item
6C um any other changes or to the
agenda okay hearing none we'll move on
to Old business the first is review of
budget to
actual so uh it should have been review
of budget to actual review of budget to
actual was not uh in your packet and I
apologize for that Cheryl was in route
to Florida and didn't get it to the
board of selectman meeting and we
usually just copy the straight one for
the board of Selectmen
meeting um what I did put in your packet
um which I thought was important and I
didn't realize it got put in in place of
that was this is last year's budget to
actual what went to the auditor um and
that that for us is really good
news um the bottom line number is that
take away everything thing from the
school and ignore that from the moment
because we don't have accurate data but
uh we had uh our total revenue was about
$187,000 more than we
anticipated um the majority of that was
our changing to the stiff account and
most of that is accounted by income from
the stiff account um some of that is
come from the fact that our new tax
collector has been a lot more aggressive
about collecting back taxes than uh
previous so we gained some additional
revenues there so that is um can I
interrupt you for just a second sure um
good information but I made a mistake
the next item on the agenda is actually
the approval of the meeting minutes from
11202 okay so in order to uh not mess
things up I think I would ask that you
hold those comments further and review
the meeting
minutes uh did anybody have any question
or corrections to the meeting minutes
for November
20th okay hearing none anybody want to
make a motion to approve the meeting
minutes I'll make a motion to approve
the meeting
minutes okay uh is that list yeah y okay
second second s your hand up first okay
any
discussion all those in favor say I hi
opposed any
abstentions no I think everybody's here
good okay sorry Eric uh thank you the
motion uh motion passes and we will move
on to the next agenda item which is
actually the old business uh budget to
actual check register Etc so go ahead or
you your talking Revenue I can share my
screen uh if you want to look at the
actual numbers or I can just give you
the the bottom line which is um and
these are un audited numbers so they are
subject to change but they're not going
to change tremendously so the pattern
will stay this way um Eric can you share
your screen please I rather just see it
and maybe it breaks it down a little is
it the same same data that's in the
packet though yeah yes it is
okay okay so you should be seeing it
there um looking at Revenue first that's
where we are uh overall in Revenue uh7
187 187
correct correct
nice so imagine Eric the U the
percentage we're getting on the bank
account I mean are we I thought we were
going to clear about 50k from that are
we're doing better than
that yeah this year I anticipated that
we would net about
$140,000 out of that nice um we actually
if if things track the way they're
tracking right now we will probably
exceed our
projections
um
which there is one you know thing at
some point the board has to wrestle with
and that is a lot of this money that's
in the stiff account is essentially our
permanent
funds um so and the reason is is that we
typically you know taxation stays ahead
of expenses by at most a month or two
because on an annual basis um our
unexpended fund balance
is only a little over a month it's about
you know 10 12% of our total budget so
most of the yet we're maintaining a two
to3 million balance in the stiff account
most of that is in the major Capital
fund money and then the question becomes
do we assign and and this is a question
for next year's budget um but I it's
going to have a bearing on how
structure the budget so it's something I
would like hopefully answered sooner
that rather than later and that is do we
credit the interest to the individual
accounts or do we credit them to the
town overall as just investment interest
um because it makes a
difference um and within the town I
don't think we care but I think the
school cares because
um presumably right now none of the the
school money essentially is or very
little of it is in that
category um but we should put it in that
category um and when we do that um
whether it's in the stiff account or
whether it's in a in a a money market
account at Webster which we're trying to
set up which will be our other option
they both return roughly the same uh
interest rate and they're both
secured um
so so question I know exactly what
you're saying ites sense who gets the
interest and I don't have and I I feel
that that's a board of Finance decision
that certainly isn't a an Eric decision
um right now there isn't a lot of money
that
in that category but as we start
transitioning to Webster and putting
some of those sums of money into a much
higher I I mean frankly we're going to
go up by about a factor of 50 on the
amount of Interest we get so it goes
from being trivial and something we're
not going to worry about to something we
should worry about so
yep I just think that should be a
discussion and a decision by the board
of fin at some point how you want to
handle it because in the next budget if
we're keeping this line item um you know
in doing it that way then um you know
then we're accounting for interest right
upfront in the budget and if not we're
accounting for it in the individual
accounts and we're probably going to
reduce the amount of money we fund those
accounts um so that we're fund you know
if the interest is going to run into it
directly if that makes sense yeah Eric
that makes total sense y Eric is this
something that um you know we can
readily wait till maybe January's
meeting for discussion and vote yep y
not expecting a decision I'm just giving
you a heads up that you will have to
make that vote yeah so I think we should
add it to January's agenda just as a
straight item make it yeah completely
agree okay okay and then on the other
side of the coin the total expenses
across the entire town budget ran about
$168,000 uh less than uh you know less
than proposed so the the bottom line is
I think you can count on about
$300,000 in
Surplus um in last year's budget we
won't know exactly until we have audited
numbers uh but you know that that's a a
really good bit of
news um so happy about that yeah good
very good news and a large part of that
is our Treasurer getting us set up and
and finally figuring out how to make the
stiff accounts work for the town so I
give her a ton of that credit for that
absolutely um yeah so that is so so
right now un audited that's the possible
amount to be added to fund balance now
when the audit happens you know they
they tend to reclassify things move some
things from permanent funds into
non-permanent and back depending on the
auditor's best judgment so that's not a
final number but you know it's not going
to be 100,000 either you know it's going
to be it should be some some number
north of
300,000 um going into the unexpended
fund balance that's our ballpark yep
okay so that's that um the check
register was in the packet y um is does
anybody want to go over that or have do
you all have specific questions on that
or what do you want to do with
that anybody have questions on the check
register items I have no question
questions no not this time right I have
no questions okay Eric there's a $4,000
payment to tyke planning and policy
group just curious about that one sure
that's our town
planner um ah yeah okay yeah we may have
talked about that one we we you had
explained some of the others last
meetings so okay I don't remember that
one though yep
all right well if there are no more
questions uh for Eric on those items we
can move on to the next agenda item
which is the uh establishing of the
banking relationship with
Webster um one line of credit and two
credit cards Eric so this is in the
works right now um we're just I I'd hope
to have more to report back to you on
the progress of that but Webster is
still processing that um you
know essentially what we're doing is
we're dipping our toes in the water we
know we don't like MNT you know we've
shopped around and looked at three or
four other Banks Webster seems to be the
one that for good reason has the most
government banking in Connecticut
because they appear to do a reasonably
good job of supporting
municipalities so as we said before and
the board of Selectmen agreed to we're
going for two things the first is
switching our town credit cards over to
Webster um and that is just simply a
fact that MNT has had our credit cards
screwed up ever since we they merged and
we've never been able to view them or
our balances in real time and that
irritates me and makes the treasur you
know crazy rightfully so so that's the
first thing the second thing is pursuing
a line of credit simply
because we should have a line of credit
to pay the expenses related to The
Bridge Project that is coming up um
because there are going to be some
months when our expenditures or
outlays
uh you know as we await reimbursement
from the state and federal government
will exceed the roughly half million
dollars we have in that fund and our two
choices are to take it from the
unexpended fund balance um which is you
know it can be done and the second way
to do it is to uh take it from a line of
credit um but I was looking at it this
way and that is if our money sitting in
the bank is earning about 5%
interest and when we take a line of
credit we're looking at somewhere around
7 to 8% interest the difference in that
is financially beneficial to the town to
keep the money in the stiff account and
work off the line of credit pay them 8%
while we're getting 5% rather than take
the money ourselves so that will take a
town meeting I've asked the board of
Selectmen to look at uh holding a town
meeting looks like there's a few things
that will probably go to town meeting um
that should be one of them and the goal
is to get that done pretty quickly
sometime in January or February so we
can go is Project scheduled to begin um
Eric sometime January February I thought
or so the the project will kick off in
February with utility
relocation um but the first time the
town is going to have a lot of money uh
that it's going to have to outlay is
when the actual
Bridge uh members come in when they
deliver the the prefab Bridge sections
um those are alone that bill to the
contractor will be about
600k so including labor and everything
else you know we're going to have a
month or so where our expenditures are
probably closer to a million dollar so
we have we have basically till June um
if we had to floated as a town we
could my concern with floating that
personally is that um if we start taking
unexpended fund balance rating other
funds temporarily to pay for it what
happens if we really do have a natural
disaster I mean I just I don't want to
dip into that unless I absolutely have
to um so Eric just a stupid question I
guess when when they're delivered those
those uh key structures like is it is it
due on delivery or what are our terms
like do we have terms that we can pay
the contractor or is it like doe those
things are delivered they need a check
today like what are our terms payment
for um
delivery so basically Bridge
projects um we use uh we have uh our own
construction management and construction
inspection for firm hired that's that's
actually a DOT requirement anyway um so
they are the ones that determine the
billing
schedule um so when they present us a
bill I think it's net 30 to to pay the
bill but we cannot apply for
reimbursement unless we have paid the
bill ah pay a bill and then we ask for a
reimbursement from the state and federal
government I see um yep two questions
one uh keying off that how long does the
state and federal government have to pay
us back 30 days as well whatever they
feel like it well that's a really good
question um and and that's been I I've
asked that
pointedly um and been told the typical
payment schedule is about 30 days um you
know in no case should it be longer than
days so the second the followup question
is on those months that we think will be
over that we think we're going to have a
a net
overage what's the ballpark is it is it
about 500,000 you were telling me you
have about $500,000 in the fund and what
kind of rotating through it and then we
might have months where we owe a million
so is it about 500,000 if we were to
fund this internally this is the point
of my question if we were to fund it
internally are we talking about half a
million dollars roughly I think at any
one time there could be up to so so that
was also a question I've had very
pointedly uh you know to the state do
and to our construction management firm
and what they've said essentially is
that worst case scenario we should be
out of pocket a million to just slightly
over a million dollars probably will
never be out of pocket more than a
million at any one time
which would leave us about a half a
million dollars
short you know so that's what that's the
magnitude we're talking about that
that's kind of what I wanted to get to
because that's our decision point right
do we float it ourselves and accept half
a million dollars temporarily out of our
fund or do we do what you're proposing
and do the bridg loan right but here's
the other thing to think about um you
know we have two steep grants we're
trying to get to the point to execute on
um one of them is about a half a million
dollars those are all reimbursement
grants so we pay the money out and then
they refund us um some of that is in the
multi-use fund anyway but it depends how
fast that project goes because the Steep
Grant you're not
necessarily asking for money back every
single month we're asking for it back
probably in two increments so we could
be out a fair bit of money for that um
you know and I I don't really anticipate
we're going to be far enough along with
the uh with the other steep Grant which
is the replacement of the uh building at
Center Street um and part of that is I
think that's going to end up because
that has been shifted to a prevailing
wage job we're going to be over what we
ini estimated for that so what I'm
trying to do is I'm trying to shave
money from the multi-use building fund
by using more Public Works time to do
excavation and other things for the
first steep Grant and then hoping to
realize some savings to that so when we
go over budget and we're pretty sure we
will on the other part um we have enough
money and we basically swapped labor for
money for that project if that makes
sense so just to clarify um if we're
talking about about a half a million
dollars uh and we would get a loan for
what you wouldn't look for half a
million you would probably look for a
little more than that yeah I would look
for a million dollar a million million
dollar line of credit for like how long
like I I don't know how this works I
honestly I'm a little bit financially
illiterate here but is it is it a thre
Monon you know and and the variance is
3% right if we're earning five and we're
paying
eight is that what we're talking about
yeah that is what we're talking about I
mean so yeah it's we're not talking
about because we're we're only talking
about not a lot of months of Interest
out there so I don't think we're talking
about big bucks that's it's not the
question of that it's just
philosophically whether you try to do it
all inhouse or you try to with the line
of credit I'm I'm just sort of trying to
get my mind around a
guesstimation of what the cost to the
town is for the loan like as opposed to
us gutting up and fronting it
ourselves what what's that what's that
3% over X months on a million
dollars gonna cost us is it $10,000 is
it 20 is it 30 is it 50 that's just so I
know difference for an entire year would
be $30,000 in interest and it's not a
whole year right it's only three months
so so for per month it's about 3,000
bucks ballpark difference yeah okay not
a lot of money yeah no fair enough I
just want to know what it is so I do too
could understand the scope yeah order
magnitude we're talking about
so right Eric can I um has this been
approved I know you were talking about
it at the board of Selectmen meeting and
they had some concerns as well as far as
I mean using it as little as possible
maybe or you know only when you I don't
know how to phrase it but when it's an
absolute necessity you know of course
trying to get by making the payments
doing whatever you could but then when
it's am I on the right track there I
thought that they had some concerns as
well yeah they do and and I'm not saying
I'm not asking promotion you know from
the board of Finance right now either
the reason is we don't have full details
I can't tell you what the exact interest
rate we're paying so until we're
presented with the final package of what
this is going to be um I'm not looking
for approvals but once we have that
we're going to need approvals fairly
quickly because this really should go to
town I mean neither me nor the board of
Selectmen nor you have the authority to
authorize this this is a town meeting
that authorizes this or not okay even at
that small amount of money it still has
to go to a town meeting a million doll
swing loan is not a small that's that's
definitely in the realm that has to go
to a town
meeting
thinking I was thinking in terms of what
the cost to the town
is right I see what you're saying I
understand what you're saying I was just
thinking in terms of you know3 $4,000
but it's actually I guess they look at
it as a million dollars I understand
right because in theory we could
authorize it and then you know Erica
spend a million bucks he won't but he
could
right yeah you're not wrong
there let's not make Eric mad I have no
intention of spending a million dollars
without a perfectly good reason
um all
right okay well thanks for that info do
appreciate it I sorry to Pepper you with
questions there but I I think I've got
my mind
around no you're the board of Finance I
mean all those are good questions
um okay well if we have nothing more on
that um I guess the next thing would be
go to the tri board meeting
review I can start this off if you want
um yeah that'd be good go ahead yeah so
we all came
together um I think the
meeting the meeting the meeting went
well obviously you know it definitely
went well the beginning um you know we
had the agenda and everybody had their
chance to speak obviously we got weighed
down a lot with which um Caitlyn and I
knew that we would discussing the
capital the AES Capital um I just wanted
to yeah Capital Improvement fund usage
protocols discussion possible actions
because that has been a big ticket item
and it's you know we've been discussing
it for like a year with the policies and
then the policy had gotten nixed that
Shannon and Rob had worked on so you
know we wanted to put that at the top
and as expected you know it went back
and forth a little bit at the beginning
like we always do um which which after a
lot of thought is why I decided to add
another agenda item tonight that I want
to discuss with all of you so that we
don't get held down in that kind of
place again and we can kind of just go
to meetings and understand what we're
there for so again it went well we had a
lot of that back and forth and you know
talked about trust issues and things of
that nature and it was very transparent
because we're all in front of each other
um and I think that you know having the
moderator that we did um Ted did a great
job yeah he really did he likes to keep
things going flowing if he feels like
you know one side's getting a little um
he's able to come back to it and he
really was good at just saying that we
all you know and I think I piped up
there too that we've kind of at some
point have to try to lose the past a
little and like the trust is going to
have to be there that we're all going to
do the right thing and the protocols
will come along um Jeff Maguire also
talked about you know getting a list
together of the priorities for the
capital fund and things of that nature
um a fiveyear plan is what he reallying
fiveyear plan wants yeah yeah I did send
that draft out to everybody kind of of
what I've seen used before just it can
be you know expounded on expanded but
it's basically just listing your
priorities in order giving the amounts
of them um and and and they seem to be
receptive to that um in the meeting it
was broken down then afterwards where we
had the Board of Ed and the
superintendent talked about the major
items that'll affect the future and the
uh demographics and the enrollment and
all of that so we heard on that the
board of Selectmen and Eric then
presented on the town major factors
coming up um and then our our part was
to talk about the expectations of the
board of Finance but um we kind of
outlined that we needed
to time yeah we needed a little time to
digest everything talk at our meeting um
going forward with that so overall those
that attended I thought it went well I
think towards the end you know Jed got
us together with like let's just work
together um and try to make this happen
with things going forward I think yeah
um to add on to that Joan I think the
things that the Board of Ed was very
receptive to and I think really kind of
set the stage was that that Five-Year
Plan and what the listing and priority
and what the amounts were and they were
very and and that what he said was is
you gave us a fiveyear plan and we will
build a plan along with the board of
Finance to figure out how to fund that
like just tell us what you needed
priorities are we understand as you have
these priorities but we can't do
anything about it without a plan because
you can't have everything this year you
got a budget for these for these things
you got a plan for them and that's where
they were like yeah we understand that
we have to it's going to take the town a
few years to put together each one of
those budget amounts for the things that
they want to spend money on and in that
light they were very very receptive I
think like you said Joan they didn't
have any you know real concerns with
that I thought they were very open to
just coming up with that plan on those
amounts and and moving moving forward
and it's a positive thing we created
this account you know for this purpose
we know there's going to be things that
have to be done there's maintenance it I
don't know if that's the right word uh
Capital project Capital project items
that need to be done in fun even start
yeah yeah and um not that's a good thing
and instead of getting stuck on you know
the the fine the fine Little Words um of
things let's just try to move forward
and and make it happen I also thought
the board selectman his opinion on there
because we we get back and forth with
well how's it going to be approved
what's the process what's that I think
we all agreed that you know that's going
to be built as we go there's got to be a
little bit of trust involved like I said
when we get to the next item I'm going
to tell you why I wanted this my one
little item brought up tonight um when
we get to the new business um I'll talk
about that it's very brief um but I I
felt like um Jeff Maguire who was there
had talked about they know these
projects are coming just you know they
they even verbally listed them out
everyone knows that's G to going to
happen and then they'll do their best
like you said bill every single thing
can't be funded right from the get-go
but emergency things or those of most
important or safety items and I think
you did add to that you know uh CIP is a
definite part of the process too you
have to have list you have to submit to
C IP there is a process that we use
today that works so their thoughts were
that we don't really need to create a
new process and I know you have
something to uh present Joanne yeah it's
just about the depositing and different
things like to make everyone feel secure
yeah but I think they were okay with the
whole fact that we have a process that
works today you submit your fiveyear
plan the mounts to the CIP and that's
the normal process and then you figure
out how we're going to fund them and
everybody seemed to be very receptive to
that yeah we really came around to that
y I just wanted to mention by the way
thank you guys for those who were able
to make it I was so frustrated I
couldn't make it that night um I had a
little natural disaster of sorts in my
house which is sorted out now but it was
like the worst possible timing it was
literally like half an hour before the
meeting and I had no water um but uh you
know just listening to that I'm happy to
hear all of this uh a lot of this boils
down to people trusting each other and
being willing to wing it a little bit uh
when Shannon and I attempted to to to
write this all down into every little
step and Define everything it became a
bit of a mess and It ultimately as we
know didn't work out so I would be
thrilled if we could get
to a more collaborative more trusting
kind of process where we can just go
through it and and one of of the things
to remember about CIP and I'm a member
of CIP we meet tomorrow night
um
CIP kind of reviews things and blesses
it or doesn't bless it but let's be
honest CIP doesn't run anything like
it's it's there as an advisory committee
it's important yes but people need to
not be scared of
CIP that if they bring something forward
to CIP and CIP doesn't like it it's not
the end of the world and you know that's
I think part of the the trust I think
that has to be there like bring it to
CIP we'll talk about it it's not like
CIP is a bunch of people who are sitting
there going well our purpose in life is
to to to say no you know so hopefully
that'll be good I would love to see a
capital plan from the school I have
talked to them about that before um
regardless of whether it's a five or 10
were there any action items kind of that
came out of this other than a couple
things we're going to talk about um the
action items no I think I think we did
talk about yeah the thing I want to talk
about after I'm hoping can be a quick
action item but just trust was a big
thing and you know I think it was told
to you know or requested of the Board of
Ed that they do put together that
priority list and get it over to I guess
the board of Selectmen was requesting it
obviously it has to go through the
proper channels and board of Finance
which Caitlyn did with the other a lot
of thought that needs to go into that
it's not gonna be so but they have needs
and they need to they need to sort it
out and I guess they are working they
said that one of their action items on
their board is they are putting the plan
together this year the three to five
years or whatever they're you know
targeting so we should see that in the
future but we also understood the
bathroom thing has kind of been on hold
so I think that's why they were kind of
pushing them to since there was money
budgeted already in this year that's
probably why they've pushed that along
to get going on that but nope at the end
we just hope to have one or two more or
one or two meetings a year just to get
everyone together and right that's why
I'm hoping once that we sorry Bill just
this one last thing once we clarify we
don't have to start off with like 50
minutes of the rehashing anymore you
know hopefully we're going to move
forward next time and and take care of
business yeah but we all needed to say
that whoever needed to speak needed to
speak and they did so and and I think
they were also you know in the end um I
forget who brought it up but like the
parking lot it's a good thing that
didn't happen you know like Jeff said
you know we never ever shot you down for
anything and us I think it might have
been Sharon said Shannon might have said
you know yeah the parking lot but then
in the end everybody was kind of happy
that you know it wasn't the number one
priority that is probably the number
three priority or something like that so
a lot of good came out of that tri board
meeting that I thought was really
helpful to have everybody together in
that room I think the other thing I just
wanted to add to the overall takeaway
Mark the last time we got together was
we weren't sure what the role of the
board of Finance Board of selectman was
going to be in the finance uh you know
the budget process and we thought there
were going to be like these joint
meetings for the for the whole budget
season and you know I asked the question
and Jeff McGuire said no no way we're
not we're meet we see you in March like
they do not plan to be part of the
budget process no I think the thing it's
just that initial meeting there's just
supposed to be an initial meeting to set
set the priorities understanding the
schedule Etc you know right but I think
the last time we got together there was
some question about what the role was
going to be of the board of Selectmen
and if they were going to be part of
this whole and I asked the question sure
and that is not the expectation at all
that they would be yeah the
meetings good
so I ask a question can I ask a question
yeah go ahead Liz um I just have like a
historical question about how how the um
the C the AES Capital fund
came in to
being that's a good
question I I I if you
really please so just generally speaking
there's no
you know Ram has their own capital
budget right it's separate and we even
voted it separately right as has never
historically had that and yet they like
any school have Capital needs right so
the only thing that was really available
to Sock money away for some future thing
was their 2% non-aps which wasn't really
designed specifically as a capital fund
furthermore they were doing a lot of
good work getting grant money and this
and that and plugging things in their
budget and they
were at times they'd get to the end of
the year and they'd have extra money and
their thought process was well we can go
like Gang Busters and try to spend the
money we've been given or we can be
allowed to save it and save it for these
purposes these things that we know are
coming down the pike that frankly we or
the the town everybody at the end of the
day we're all going to have to pay for
and so the idea was to incentivize the
Board of Ed to not go ahead and spend
money in a budget like preload in
supplies or anything like that for the
next year just to take the money if
there's if there's actually an overage
if not an overage sorry let me rephrase
that if there's actually money left over
in a budget
to go ahead and say to us can we put
that away can we put that aside for a
capital project that we know full well
is coming um and will you bless it and
that kicked off a discussion and you
know it's been a lot from then to now
but the at the end of the day the border
the the that's the ultimate idea here is
that the incentive is
to be to to spend what you need to spend
not more and plan for the future and
that and the a bon was designed so they
could put that money in there it would
stay there and then uh I think this year
is the first year Eric right that we
actually as a
town excuse me um this year is the first
year as a town that we put $100,000 into
that same fund to start this money
growing and doing something I I'll be
right back guys I just
that's that's exactly right and it's all
about incentives and it's about um you
know encouraging people to to not use it
or lose it board of Selectmen also I
think Eric too right didn't they that
that is going to align right with what I
want to talk about with my item
afterwards but I believe the board of
Selectmen discussed too unless it came
out of what Rob said just establishing a
fund this year am I right Eric I think
the board of Selectmen started it no we
create that created it well or did we we
decided we created that I I go to so
many meetings I knew it was discussed
there oh we created it they funded it
they decided the funding amount okay
sorry correct so so both both boards
were clearly in favor of capital funds
right and you know it's it's water under
the bridge but
um I had advocated years ago when we set
up all the other Town Capital funds for
doing one for the the Board of Ed at the
same time um and and it was really kind
of so so what I'm saying is I'm
absolutely in favor of this it that
building runs will have major Capital
expenditures that need to be made to
keep it in decent shape and replace
major mechanical systems and things like
that roofs and we need to establish a
fund um and we did and that's a great
thing and that's a smart budgeting tool
moving forward as far as I'm concerned
yep let me ask let me ask this so are
you saying that the other departments in
town have their own Capital fund as well
I hope not not what what I heard what I
heard from from Jeff was that the
buildings are all owned by the town yes
and that is the purpose for the Sip for
for people to gather up their their
projects and say look this is what we
need you go to the SIP you get it
approved and then in then that gets uh
presented to the town and then the town
can see overall what what projects are
coming down the line so that the town
can overall make a plan for the various
buildings my
yeah that's that's right basically what
he said y so I guess I'm wondering why
they would have a special fund that if
other departments didn't have a capital
fund is carved here's the thing in the
town Charter and in State Statute and
stuff like that the board of vet has a
lot of Independence uh they're carved
out of a lot of things uh it's just the
way the statutes read it's just the way
the charter reads and this leads to the
question of
who gets to decide what and
unfortunately if you don't have the
trust established you get into
these frankly unproductive Tores over
who gets to put make certain decisions
at the end of the day it's all it's all
our money this is something that Jeff
says all the time right it's all our
money in the end ah it's the town he's
right and he's right however the
when you go into try to draft a document
and see this is the rights and
responsibilities of this board versus
that board now you get into what the
charter says what the statutes say and
so forth we tried to end around that
we Shannon I's best efforts ultimately
failed um but it sounds like DX mck may
have happened and we may get to a better
place regardless which would be lovely
but yeah the at the end of the day the
Board of Ed is not the same thing as
like the fire
department they have rights and
responsibilities that are laid out in
Charter and in state law that are not
the same as
like public works
right it comes down to kind of like
nitpicking of the budget money that they
have they are responsible for to
maintenance and operation of that school
as well as educating the kids but the
town owns the property the building
and it comes to what is a capital item
and what is not and obviously a building
is a capital item right and I the way I
got Shannon kind of to accept it and
stop the arguing was I said Shannon if
you had to build a new school how would
you go about doing
that and she just kind of looked down
and accepted yeah you'd have to go to
the town and it's a capital
expend and that and that's true and at
the same time you know it's funny when
you look at the the actual underlying
stuff the the charter the the statutes
and everything it it literally says
things like the the the Board of Ed
controls the operation and
maintenance of the school which at the
same time the town owns right you get
these ambiguities and you can get lost
in the weeds easily I I swear to you
this is true because I got lost in those
weeds and it's really it can be super
frustrating so anyway my take for what
it's worth of the whole thing is if we
can
simplify and trust each other and see
how it goes I'm thrilled I'd be thrilled
because every single time I tried to put
together a document that was respectful
of literally everyone and and and and
comported with State Statute Town
Charter you know and so forth we ran
into problems so to the extent that we
can get past that I'm thrilled can I add
thanks to everyone who went to that
meeting yeah I just want to add Liz to
your point I want to Circle back to what
Rob said and I just think it's important
to have this account because if there
were surpluses or money left over at the
end of the year by establishing this it
creates a trust within the Board of Ed
that their funding that the town did
vote in for them will go back to their
building you know to the
building it's not it's not a perfect you
know it it just it made sense because
instead of spending like like he said
some of the Surplus that was left over
on supplies for the next year or
whatever because there was grants at
least we had an Avenue in an account
where this would go back um to the
repairs or the projects that are going
to happen there right again I want to
jump into my part so bad but I'm
honoring our agenda yeah because we're
touching on it so much I have to just
keep my mouth shut um because it's so
simple and it does kind of um you know
address all of this and I think that in
the end it is on the towns you know it's
it's a town account we created it in the
town budget the 100,000 was funded by
what was um and
ultimately the decision process is going
to be made through CIP and those kind of
things so it's taking in all kinds of
um all kinds of
um however we're all GNA be priorities
are are met or whatever decided with the
trust that was a big word that I brought
out Rob that time that at some point
we're gonna have to jump in and trust
and get this thing rolling none of this
works I don't care how you draft it none
of this works if you don't trust each
other and people from all sides have
have thrown it out there that they want
to this to happen so anyways that's it
on the tri board meeting yes and
appreciate we move to my next item and I
I'll shut up but I also just want to say
again the the the incentivization here
of I'd rather have them save for a rainy
day or not just a rainy day a a plumbing
problem or whatever it might be then
think to themselves I got to spend
another $50,000 in my budget or I lose
it it's
just I'm not saying that they were
irresponsible with their money I'm
saying humans are humans and you don't
want to set up the wrong incentive
structure so this sets up worked
out I think I think we should move on
honestly I mean this is one revie of a
meeting so want to get through this is
December we often don't even have this
meeting so I'd like to go ahead Bill
Mark the last thing is I just wanted to
let you know that when we get into the
budget discussions that we do have some
numbers from the Board of Ed um and from
Eric into town on insurance costs that
are going up you know new teachers that
are needed so we do have some numbers to
work with when we do get in the budget
also came out of this tri board meeting
they did give us you know kind of what
they're looking at so we know where to
go when we start putting the budget
together so we do have those numbers we
don't have to go over them now I just
want you to know that we do have those
numbers in that meeting okay
good all right well if I could then I
would suggest let's move on to our new
business uh 6A is the AES Capital fund
policy so Joanne you had
proposed yeah so just just kind of after
going to the Trib Bo meeting and once
again you know we had about the hour of
the discussion where you see a little
bit of the mistrust and all of that I
you know I went home and thought about
it for like a week and and revamped it
and I said you know I know we threw away
the policy and all the
you know particular language that Robin
Shannon had worked on but I thought that
and I sent it all out to you tonight
because I wanted I didn't want it to be
out there and to get around and
everybody to be talking about it ahead
of time um I I know I sent it to you
Eric and to Mark I don't know would you
be able okay it's very simple it's using
language that Robin Shannon put together
as far as the depositing of the money
and what you know just the account in
general I'm hoping everyone would see
this as favorable can Mark hear for us
did you send it to Mark can Mark I sent
it to Mark and Eric I'll share it right
now it's super simple I think we all got
it but yeah it's it's really really uh
paired down I just wanted to say that
you know we established the account
we're going to call it the AES Capital
fund or whatever was in Cheryl's
language I'm pretty sure the treasurer
has name named it this I know we were
trying to name it all kinds of different
things but we're going to trust that we
know what that stands for everything to
do with the school projects at the
school you know that's designated as a
capital thing and not a daily running of
the building um so the town created the
account the town may choose to deposit
money into this Capital fund through its
budget process we understand that it was
done this past year this is the
important part to build so that um the
school
what Rob was alluding to
tonight um we want to be able to let
them know that if they had a surplus
left at the end of the prior year after
the audit they could go ahead and take
that and put it in this account um so
the endover Board of Education may also
choose to deposit money from its budget
into the AES Capital fund at the end of
the fiscal year on June 30th of each
year the Boe May transfer unspent money
from the boe's budget from the prior
year into this Capital fund that can
slowly build it up you know if they have
a 100,000 left over they could add it in
and we would be okay with that I'm
certainly okay with that because I know
it'll there's plenty of projects to be
funded in the future and then I just
thought we couldn't establish we all
decided that we were going to trust and
we would move forward with
how um projects were going to be chosen
to be funded but I thought it would be
alleviating and alleviate um any worry
that um just this little thing that all
the money in the AES Capital fund shall
be spent on capital projects for Andover
elementary school and you know the
grounds however we wanted to put that
um I like this idea to you know it's
kind of talks about what we um wanted to
do but it also speaks to if there's
money left over in any current budget
I'd love to see it go into this fund and
then they won't feel like they have to
pre- supplies for next year or something
if these things are more important so
thoughts from anyone
else well and I think the the bottom
line there is section two just kind of
adds that element of trust that this
money is to be used for AES School
Capital Improvements now we all know and
we've talked about this in the past if
you know a plane fell out of the sky and
hit the town hall then that money would
be available to rebuild the town hall is
some emergency and some disaster but
that under no other circumstances would
the board of Finance say oh we're gonna
take that money and use it for something
else they have to know and feel
comfortable and trust that the money
that they save and the money that the
town puts into that AES Capital fund is
theirs and it's not going to be robbed
for anything else that's the most
important piece of this whole thing yeah
I agree um I would just say that you you
know I have no particular objection to
this in any way guys um I would just say
the schs that shann and I ran a ground a
ground on repeatedly were things like
defining what is
capital uh and all the little
nitty-gritty specifics this policy here
if I understand it correctly and I think
that I I get the vibe this policy here
is basically saying to heck with that
I'm going to just lay out a mission
statement and this is how and and people
are going to interpret this in good
faith and we're going to move forward
I'm fine with that um I'll just point
out that I could if I was inclined to do
so pick at this thing all sorts of ways
uh by pointing out you know what is
capital what is not and and all this and
that yeah but we went I'm fine with it
we we I'm fine with it we had an lawyer
and insurance person go through that we
saw yeah you had a lawyer
I'm not I'm not begrudging a lawyer guy
work with lawyers all day right and we
were unable to get there so I am
perfectly willing to admit defeat and
and this is great um by all means this
is that annoying insurance guy that
there are if somebody wanted to nitpick
this they could oh I'm just put up yeah
but I I think the basics are the
important things are there right I mean
it makes it clear what the capital fund
is you know how it's funded it makes it
clear that it's used for you know AES
projects you know it's not part of the
charter but I think it's policy it's
it's simple and I think you know gets us
I'm good with it and I'm happy to vote
for it I'm just I'm just gonna say you
know there were there were iterations of
the drafts that Shannon and I came up
with that were we got more and more
complex as we went along as we tried to
address every objection this one just
basically is like never mind and I'm
good with that let's and we may need to
add to it at times or clarify something
you know I'm just saying that's all and
I mean no dis that that's a compliment
not this is like complimentary not uh a
nitpick I'm not actually I want to make
them after going to the tri board
meeting and then sitting you know we're
all we always start off with that hour
of back and forth and the getting to the
trust part so I thought this would
simplify it the funds that could be
deposited into it that we were fine with
them putting any surplus into it that's
the main thing yeah thank
you I think we're just touching on the
go ahead they removes the bit where we
okay it for instance as one example like
the old policy was like they could ask
us to put money in and we would okay or
not okay this one removes that right
they can just choose to do it that's a
gesture of good faith to them I'm on
board with that I'm just saying that's
something that in the past when I when
we brought it up you know we would
debate it we would sit here in our
meeting and we debate it so yeah I'm I'm
cool with it I'm not you know I have no
objection uh and if this flies and if
this works I'm thrilled I think I was
just gonna say that I think the way we
can kind of get around you know what is
the definition of I mean there is a
clear definition you can look it up what
a capital expenditure is but take that
out of the process and just say I think
if we were to need to add something to
section two at all or any part of this
it is the list of their wants that
they're going to present to CIP which
you know Celeste and uh I forget the
other person's name Kaitlyn Kaitlyn
Caitlyn thank you uh you know they have
a list they going to come up with okay
these are the capital things that they
know they have to come to the town for
the money for that's not in their budget
they put that list together and those
are that's the list of capital
expenditures that they want funded by
so it goes in here that these you know
the list of funds that they submit to
CIP are the things that are protected by
this fund if you will and and they're
defining because they're going to give
us the list of their top I thought was
it three or five yeah I I love that idea
Bill the idea that their list of
capitals is what we mean by Capital
exactly right and they need to T to fund
those things so they have to come to the
town and say these are our Capital wants
now there's no argument about what is a
capital what isn't so I like it should
it be should it be indicated in here and
made clear that the decision is made by
the town or the board of Finance or
whoever
Welling you know you we could start
going adding more detail but I think
that that that's just part of our normal
processes so it doesn't necessarily need
to be I mean clearly the town controls
the money because it's in a town account
yeah thebly don't need add that just
because it would be normal capital
expenditure process I tried to Define
all that right Liz we had that L down so
badly that I'm I'm now I'm I'm just I'm
converted like let's do this because
when we tried to lay out the
step-by-step process it it just led to
more problems right um let's just roll
with this and see how it
works that's what I say because I think
we agreed at that meeting you know that
like you said there was going to be the
trust and we were going to just get to
the process when we tried to lay out
like you said Rob every single step I
was more concerned of what could go into
it what this was it obviously we're
going to have some kind of vote down the
road or whatever with what happens this
is just defining this little piece of it
um of what money could go into it yeah I
have a question yep go ah is this going
to be reviewed by the town's attorney no
I don't think it needs to internal Board
of Finance policy yeah okay so there's
nothing legal around this and there's
nothing saying it couldn't be added to
amended clarified in three months if we
find it it's just not working or we need
this more information so I mean we could
have it but again it's nothing legal so
it doesn't really need to I mean you
know the last draft that Shan and I
produced went to the town attorney and
it didn't go well so
true I like that it's our internal Board
of Finance policy and I think it will
alleviate it will the board of vet I
think would be in favor of it I haven't
showed anyone there but I think this at
least lays out a few things that might
you know yeah obviously they have to
weigh in but um you know I'm happy to
bless it so let's see what they say so
are we gonna vote on this to see if we
want to take this and take a motion to
adopt this as the board of Finance
policy I'll go ahead and so move that we
adopt uh Joann's draft a capital fund
policy um pursuant to pursuant to to uh
subject to review uh from Boe I'll
second okay so you're you're you're
saying we need to have them review it
well don't don't you think fine we can
am
input I'm I'm happy to to just pass it
um but you know obviously we all have to
be on board so no I'm fine okay I can
I'll amend my motion I I'll just say
let's let's uh go ahead and um I I'll
move that we pass Joann's as capital
fund policy for the board of Finance
that's that's what I want then we'll and
then we'll communicate that to Boe and
hope that yeah get feedback that's good
my intention was to send it to them
after this meeting and you know for
their comments and and say that like we
we passed it we blessed it what do you
guys think hold on guys we're getting a
little bit out of out of out of order
here so Bill are you still seconding the
motion as Rob describe it okay go into
discussion then my amended as amended
yeah this is kind of the board you have
your hand up I see so let's let's
got yeah so
the only hey it's it's your policy you
can set whatever you want not opposed to
it in any way shape or form the only
thing to me that's a little unclear is
you say after the end of the fiscal year
on June 30th they may transfer the funds
personally I would be more comfortable
saying uh after the audit is complete
they may transfer the funds so that
we're sure that we don't get into the
same question we had last year which is
they thought they had this amount of
money and then after the audit they had
this amount of money which happens y
good point you remind me when the audit
is supposed to be
done if we hit our Target finally when
would it be done so we would have had
the final audit already um it's
technically supposed to be done by uh
December
31st
okay but that's a big that's a big gap
yeah a big gap but it doesn't really it
doesn't really change anything for the
purpose for the purposes right it just
means that technically the money is not
going anywhere right right so it just it
just gets moved in the accounts after it
says unspent money
so yeah that's a really good point
though you might wantan
to sh that budget thing is the is the is
the gap that's gonna hang them up
because again we don't we haven't even
had our audit finished yet
right well someday we'll get it to on
time well it it's it's actually not
honestly I think it's unrealistic to
expect it to get done on time um so
we're we're
done and have everything handed off to
the auditor well before they have the
capability to review because there are
so few auditing firms today that um
unless you're like their the first
client or second client that they tackle
um you know it's not going to get done
last year I think 30 towns out of
169 met the absolute missed the absolute
last drop dead date which is next uh
June
30th um so and probably well under half
the towns in the state miss the state's
you know uh official deadline of
December 31st there just isn't enough
auditor capacity to do
it so are do you have a proposed
language that we should use Eric in that
line right there are or do you want to
stick with the audit word or do you want
what where do we go um I would say you
know at the end of the fiscal year after
the audit
and just keep it that simple uh the boa
May transfer unspent funds yeah because
that's when we would do it anyway yeah
okay if there were ever an emergency we
could always address it on a case-by
Case basis somehow I think sure okay
just an internal policy but I think it
does make sense okay
perfect so you want to amend well I
think we we have to vote on the motion
as presented so I would say that if
we're not language we would probably
vote it down and then reintroduce a
different motion so if there's no more
discussion I'll call for a vote all
those in
favor all those opposed opposed no any
extensions okay motion is defeated and
we can entertain other motions all right
so we want to amend section
1B right Y correct at the end of our
Board of v may also choose to deposit M
from budget at the end of the fisc
year and after the out and upon the
completion of the
audit yeah so we transfer UNS spent
money to the board of education's budget
at the end of the year maybe remove June
30th just say at the end of the fiscal
year and upon the completion of the
audit
right the Boe May after the end of the
fiscal year and upon completion of the
audit because I'll re okay got it does
that make sense guys yeah I think so
yeah and again we can always revisit
this if we decide it's not clear enough
or we need to add something sounds if
it's unworkable or whatever y um and
then everything else remains so that
would be my suggested
um okay so you're moving to accept the
policy with that that Amendment correct
can I ask can I ask a question though
before we we really gotta look for a
second and then we can discuss is there
a second I'll second that again okay
Bill yeah okay go ahead Liz sorry um so
there's no mention of the 2% non-lps
account should that's separate that's
different yeah okay so they get their 2%
non-aps and then this is up to them they
would decide they they would decide if
they even wanted to use the 2% they
don't have to right they may decide this
gives them the option to roll it all now
into the capital fund if they would like
to yeah or they may say can we put some
in the 2% and the remainder this is just
setting the the rules for this
particular right just as a point of
clarification they can put 2% of their
budget in the non-aps account regardless
because that's the state law now right
so that you couldn't influence either
way it wouldn't be up to us right it
used to be a board of Finance vote and
and this is kind of where some of
concern I think where the trust came
just to kind of I know Liz was asking
about some of the background but there
were a couple years where we just said
no and the reason was because we asked
for a longer term plan to support that
and we never really got it right and I
think the board's kind of on board if
you'll forgive that with the idea of
producing a longer plan so I think you
know we're getting past that but that
was one of the reasons that kind of led
us to this uh separate Capital fund
which I all fully agree with for a whole
lot of other reasons as well so can can
I just ask a question please just clear
with this um so they'll have their 2%
fund that they're entitled to of course
um and then they'll also have the
ability to just keep any money left over
in their budget so there'll be those
two that money would go to Capital clear
with that okay I'm reading the 2% the
rules for it and I believe it's it's up
to them if they wanted to take they'll
have their unexpended funds this is you
know with that say there was $100,000
left probably I mean it reads in here
that they can
request any portion of the unexpended
funds um you know the 2% or whatever go
into that non-aps thing for whatever
they did with that I don't know if I
have all the history of that but they
also could take all of the unexpended
funds if we adopt our new policy and put
it in the capital fund account and might
not even ask us to put any in the
2% so it's it's their money Am I Wrong
Eric no you're you're you're right in
the sense that the 2% they have every
opportunity they have every right
without your oversight at all right up
to 2% of their budget they can designate
for the 2% non-aps and account the the
thing I think that is
unclear and I know when we asked the
auditor the auditor was of the opinion
that the 2% non-aps account could also
be spent on
Capital um but several people including
Shannon have told me Point Blank that
I'm wrong and I don't know the answer
all I know is what the auditor said he
said it's an educational expense it's a
capital educational expense so you could
spend it so I don't have any kind of
legal opinion other than what the
auditor said um in their shoes I would
probably Max the 2% non-aps account and
then put the rest in unexpended fund
balance because I think it probably
gives them more
flexibility um and the 2% non-aps
account is completely under their
control it may be held in town accounts
and that's a state policy but but if
they request money for it you know the
treasure has to release that money there
is no that's not an oversight Thing by
anybody other than the board of bed I
just don't want Kim and Liz to think
they're two things like it's it's one
pot of money that they're deciding where
it goes there's only one total amount
it's just where they decide to put it so
right it's their they have a
surplus 2% goes into their 2% non-lps
and then this remaining balance they
either need to put it into this fund
this Capital fund or it goes back to the
town that's that's the option right
exactly y basically well you haven't
been involved in the board with all and
I get it and I understand you're coming
at it from the correct angle that you
want to we've done a lot of work to get
it to this point so that this account
could it is a town account but it's
there for capital projects that we
already know are gonna have to be done
so thing is they don't have to put into
the 2% account that's what I'm saying
right they don't now I don't know how
this is gonna play out you know Eric
scenario is possible I don't know um I
know there's some ambiguity in the
language and so decisions can be made
and we're going to kind of find out and
I think we should r with it for now and
see how it works and if it's not working
we can revisit But ultimately the idea
is they should be able to put aside
money for these Capital we all know that
are coming yeah and I don't want them to
be in the mindset
of either we put in the 2% non lapsing
or we lose it right so that was the
idea that's it that's it and I'm done
I'm done I don't want to sorry I don't
want to belabor it and this is already
money that was voted on you know it's
prior years it's not going forward we're
just talking about a policy that's going
to take money that's left over and
instead of getting spent on other things
it's going to go to projects that need
to be done that's you know I understand
that yeah no no and I'm not trying to
fight you on I know you're coming at it
because saying just she just is ask yeah
I I understand the yeah yeah so that's
do we want to vote on this guys we
haven't voted yet so
yes do anybody have any uh any other
further discussions directly pertaining
to the motion to accept the policy with
the amendment that Rob
proposed okay all in favor say I I any
opposed no any extensions
okay motion passes we'll use this as our
policy and as several have noted we can
almost change it or add to it or modify
it if we decide we need to and of course
as I think others suggested uh we can
pass this on to the board of ed for
their input if they have some requested
language or ideas we can always do that
um so the okay we'll move on to 6B which
is budget discussions so we have several
sub items here Eric I presume that you
had
uh add had these added to the uh
agenda uh yes they are in the uh packet
I just did want to say um so you all can
get a heads up because at some point
you're going to have to start figuring
out when you want to do budget meetings
and that is my goal is to have a pretty
well fleshed out uh draft around
February Ary
3rdd um for the town General and for the
capital budgets for both the board of
Selectmen and finance to review um and
then I will be available for meetings on
a weekly basis from there until the
budget passes um other than uh I am
taking some time in February or in March
uh and taking a week then but I will
only miss one budget meeting doing
that or one potential meeting doing that
so this uh this letter that you have
outlined to the board of selectman board
of Finance Board of Ed to the treasurer
gives that General outline for the uh uh
the dates you're proposing so that makes
sense correct so you can feel free to
schedule budget meetings I know there
was some concern that your time frame to
do this was going to be considerably
crunched you can feel free to to
schedule budget meetings from the
beginning of February on um Mark I was
hoping that we were GNA start
mid-February I don't do you I don't know
I'll open it up to see what everyone
else thinks I know we're gonna get it in
our hands I was hoping to review it a
little bit are we because if we started
mid-February we're going to go well into
March like we always do unless
everybody's I mean that's a whole month
sooner than we do normally but if other
people are in favor for the start of
February
I'll sit back and listen well I don't
think we need to make a necessarily
decision right now but so starting
starting February 5th so I think what
Eric is just proposing is that as of
that date we should be able to start
having meetings whether we choose to
have them or not is kind of another
matter the only one we actually have to
have is the town hearing right
so but
okay okay and then propose that we get
the board of v on the 15th and we start
go ahead and follow up with the we
meetings as we uh as we
would propose them okay right and then
I'll go through this other
stuff uh real quick considering assuming
I can figure out
which is that the one
hopefully okay hopefully you're looking
at the correct thing um so I just want
to bring a couple things things and I
know I've talked about this but our
working assumption at this point should
be that the grand list will be
flat um I'm hoping it's slightly
positive but it could also be slightly
negative overall due to a a series of
changes in how taxation is done in the
state of
Connecticut um I'm proposing probably
pretty minimal changes in this budget
versus next year's budget I think as a
town we're about funded correctly in
terms of capital and operating expenses
so um I'm not anticipating any major
programmatic changes in the town for
this year um there are some potential
for significant Personnel changes um as
some of you know the uh Municipal
Retirement program which is called murf
or Ms depending on which acronym you use
has changed their formula for how they
calculate cost of living
increases um and it seems like anybody
that was going to retire in the next
three years um or four years
even probably makes sense to go right
now um so I think there are two
employees
potentially um an outside chance of a
third taking that there's there's three
where it might be beneficial for them to
go right now so that might be effect on
the town I don't want to talk about who
that is um that's out of the range just
so that you're aware of that um the
other good thing is the diesel and
heating fuel costs are uh quite a bit
lower than we were uh than we are
currently um we locked in diesel for the
year at around 250 seven a gallon um so
that's great
that's you know that's 30 or so cents a
gallon cheaper than it was last year so
pretty happy with that maybe it goes
down some more but historically over the
last 20 or so years sometime in December
is the best time to lock in um so I got
permission from the board of Select and
locked into that um so as as we talked
about in terms of the major projects
it's going to be Bunker Hill Lake Road
finishing off the community center and
the route
316 multi-use pathway um the only one I
don't have fully covered right now is
the route 316 multi-use pathway um I
actually have construction funds um but
there's still a gap in the design funds
um and I'm hoping to get an exact number
on that prior to budget season
um and then that's either going to have
to be budgeted somehow in this year or
put off for a year um questions on any
of
that okay NOP no um here is the good
news um and that our percentage of
enrollment as I said three years ago and
then two years ago and then last year
and then this year is still going down
um so the the great thing about that is
Ram budget can increase
3.4% um and our town Levy will stay the
same so that's the number to look at um
I don't know what they're going to
actually come in for a budget so if it
comes in at 10% it's still going up
pretty considerably if it comes in at
three or 4% it's basically cost neutral
for the town ER yep uh my question was
um Ram voted to accept uh students from
Colombia now I thought that was going to
start this year is that or I guess next
year is that true that is true and so
will that affect these
percentages uh because you're adding
another town in there it should change
all of these percentages well I think
they're still under negotiation and and
we don't you know it may it may help
actually if they offset some of the
overhead cost right but I'm not sure I'm
not sure it would add them to this
percentage either I think it might be
like a surplus that they didn't
distribute according to this formula I'm
not really
sure right so so they don't necessarily
become like a voting in part of like we
you know there's man it's Andover you
know marble Hein but they don't become
like a voting member of the Ram Board
they're just going to send students out
a cost per head I'm just trying to
figure out how that affects
I don't think we really know yet that
was my understanding of the idea was
that they would send students but they
don't
necessarily it wouldn't be
Ram or whatever one of the schools of
choice right so it's not like it's all
in okay thank you actually the acronym
would be
cram
uh I thought of that like 10 seconds
after I said it yeah Colombia sends kids
to multiple offers their kids multiple
uh high schools as options um I think
currently they have EOS
Smith Windom Tech and maybe leanon isn't
it Lebanon no maybe it's Lebanon I I'm
I'm not actually sure I know they uh
every so many years they go out to bid
essentially with all the local schools
to uh
um you know and then parents have a
choice about where to send their kids
righta so that's all I know about ram
ram superintendent Colin did email me
this week and asked me whether there was
a specific date that you as a board
wanted to get the Ram budget
presentation um and have him talk come
to present at the board and talk through
budget um I said I would bring it up
with you um it can be whenever whenever
you want to schedule
that well in February yeah probably one
of our budget meetings do we remember
when we did it last
year do we have a date if I wish it'll
be ready to
discuss um well I think he basically
said he's probably prepared to talk
about it in some form now I mean if
you're talking about it now it hasn't
actually gone through Ram so it's
preliminary right if you talk about it
later it's more
finalized okay um so yeah yeah you
probably we'll try to get some more
information on when that would be ready
I mean later the later the better I mean
it's it's one of these things we just
simply don't have much control over so
it really doesn't affect our budget just
as long as we have a number to plug I
mean it does affect our budget we just
don't control it but all right okay I
yeah I mean I'd like to hear from them
when
it's more feel pretty solid about it
yeah yeah yeah I don't want to we talked
to them now it feels way too early at
the same time you don't want to be like
right before It's Tricky but I I
personally don't want to talk to them
too early
yeah Eastern
Highlands what is your question about
this or previous yeah cosmetology
permits
Y what is that um so we are covered by a
health district called Eastern Highlands
health district it is a state law that
towns have to have uh a whole series of
capabilities um no small town has the
capability to do that on their own um a
city like or a municipality like will am
Mantic does but um Eastern Highlands
health district is I think 10 or 11
towns in Eastern Connecticut um and so
these are the things that the state
mandates that the health departments
regulate so yes every
cosmetology and this has been new in the
last couple of years so they're still
adopting adapting to that has to be
inspected on an annual basis um in
charged a fee for that
service um so they do every
uh commercial you know food
establishment um they do cosmetology
they do group homes um they review all
subdivision plans for subsurface uh
septic um anytime there's the potential
for a sewage
installation uh they review those um
they do vaccine Administration programs
throughout the district um including the
endover elementary school um they do a a
ton of stuff uh overall um so the reason
why I wanted to bring this to your
attention is kind of the bottom line so
this budget was proposed by the director
Rob Miller um and it will go to there
will be a public hearing um you can all
go to that next month if you so desire
um I do sit on both the the policy board
and the
executive uh I am technically the
assistant Treasurer um but I have no
duties when it comes to being the
assistant Treasurer because
Mansfield's the town of Mansfield's paid
treasure is also the actual paid
treasure for the health district so um
it's just essentially the third
executive board position so their budget
right here the important part is this is
what is budgeted for the member Town
contributions it's going up from
474 to
486,000 uh in round
terms true can you point I I can't see
what your oh okay
propos okay right go ahead and so the
the thing to keep in mind is that what
the towns pay into the program is about
half the total cost of programs broadly
speaking they get three big buckets of
funds one comes from the town one comes
from the state and federal government
and one comes from service fees so if
you're putting installing a septic uh
field you pay for the review and that
money goes to Eastern Highlands help
this
and their sanitarian comes out and
inspects so uh this is the from our
perspective this is the number we focus
on is what is the total budgeted
increase um and then the question so
overall the the increase for the member
towns is about
3% but every year the State Department
of Health decides what the population in
each town uh uh
is um so some towns have declined in
population uh some towns have increased
in population slightly so that affects
the the rates for the individual town
they have our town listed as
3,144 people uh which is down about 15
people from the last time they did the
the survey and I I don't know where the
you where the
the uh State comes up with those
population numbers because it doesn't
seem to correlate to the American
Community survey data which is like what
the federal government does and seems to
be the most accurate numbers but I don't
know that that's where they come up with
it so they come up with a per capita
proposed per capita free to the town I'm
going to flip down to Andover so the
bottom line is their proposed budget is1
19,340 which is an increase to the town
of Andover around
$680 um if you have any feedback for the
health department that you want to relay
through me I would be happy to to do it
if you have any specific
questions um and then this this I also
put in oh yeah that's pretty much
everything I put in for the Health
Department there is some more details in
there I just gave you I didn't give you
their whole budget package it's about 25
pages long I just gave you snapshots of
what I thought you know kind of the
bottom lines were and I'll take any
questions on that if you have
it
questions we're certainly lucky to be
part of you know yes we are one of the
one one of the towns because obviously
it's a big expense but by being part of
the district very helpful no right yeah
I don't have any question seems fine
yeah I will see one of the the huge
headwinds that help
districts face is that there is an
extreme shortage of professionals to do
this um you know it takes if you start
off with somebody with with a uh
microbiology degree um it's probably
about four years of training to get him
to be a licensed
sanitarian um you know four years of on
the job training before he's really
launched on his own um the towns and
health departments are all poaching from
each other pretty incessantly so the the
biggest issue the healthc care you know
the the district has faced is really
sharply
increased Personnel
costs um and you know trying to maintain
staff so thank you for presenting it
yeah
yep okay yeah so we went over the major
Trends enrollment data The District
budget uh the final budget to actual
that was what I had it it just got stuck
in the packet earlier so we don't need
to uh go over that uh
and so I also included in in there what
I gave to the department heads and board
chairman for what I wanted back for
information um which is so so the basic
procedures the first thing that happens
is each department head or chair or
somebody that's responsible for some
aspect of the money gets a budget
worksheet um which they are expected to
fill out um and then what I what I want
back every year is detailed written
explanations of you know you can have a
line item that says you
know $700 for ink or $700 for you know
copier or supplies um and the average
person looks at that and says that's
nuts but then you find out it's the
building department and the ink for that
big chart plotter is really expensive um
so so that kind of thing um and my goal
is to get that back so when you ask me
questions I have all the physical
material to refer to um I'm happy to
pass all of that on to you if you want
to review it all
uh
yourself um you always have the option
of bringing in people to ask questions
directly about their budgets as you you
know as you desire um or you can relay
them through me whatever whatever you're
happy with as a process when are those
going out to the everybody those have
been out
for uh three weeks so everybody every
department has its budget at this point
I haven't seen anything for
zba um then email me tomorrow morning
okay and we'll figure out why
yep does this come in in like Excel
format or what kind of what does it look
like does it does we send them an Excel
worksheet um in and we ask them to send
it back electronically because if it we
send it back electronically it can be
fit directly into our spreadsheet
without additional
somebody transposing all the numbers not
every board in commission is
sophisticated enough to be able to do
that in Excel
spreadsheet um a lot of them we get back
and and we deal with it as they
are um I did have a discussion with the
treasurer today um I'm hoping that she's
going to have me back the the overall
budget worksheet template um um pretty
quickly so we can start the the
Departments that have already given us
their numbers um you know and the other
thing is I I the other thing I always
ask is for them to let me know what
numbers are verified and what numbers
you know are uncertain because we know
six months out or eight months out
before the fiscal year you may not have
all the contracts lined up many things
you're going to have an exact number
that's reliable um like you know our
because they existing contract
multi-year contracts and other things
you know may have a fair bit of
uncertainty to it so I want to know that
what numbers when I'm presenting you in
February are locked in and what numbers
are variable and why so that's basically
what what my ask is to all the
department heads then it gets collated
at our end and present presented back
out um and you know I gave them an
example I took one border commission um
and
then you know specified kind of the
level of detail that I wanted for it and
an explanation so hopefully we get the
information back that we want um so
that's that's kind of everything I have
for that
unless you have
questions no thank you for showing
us yeah I appreciate you explaining the
process I mean I definitely had some
questions about how this is done
annually and this really helps me
understand it um better so thank you
sure but what I would also say is that
as the board of Finance you have a lot
of control over how this is done as much
or as little as you want to you know um
at one point the board of Finance would
bring in every single board in
commission and compile the the budget
completely themselves we've switched to
me providing the preliminary budget and
then you having the opportunity to
review and adjust as you see fit I think
that's a workable you know and that kind
of align aligns with the changes in the
charter now um you know but if there's
specific departments you want to uh talk
to um in terms of specifics there are
some things that are out of your hands
like for instance the board of
Selectmen uh technically sets the salary
and
benefits um for everybody who is a
Municipal Employee that is not elected
you as the board of Finance
set the salary for
uh um elected
officials um so those those go directly
to you the others come through the the
board of
Selectmen um other than that you know
everything else is is pretty much under
your review yeah and just uh you know
for the for the benefit of those that
haven't gone through this typically with
the Departments we don't talk to them
directly is Eric mentioned and I think
it's a much more efficient process to
have him kind of collate it and you know
challenge the the folks because he knows
what they're doing he knows what they've
done in the past he's very familiar with
the operations some of the exceptions
have been usually Department of Public
Works that's the big spend department so
sometimes especially if they're looking
for equipment funding or something like
that in advance we'll have Jay come in
and you and Eric will will talk about
some of the if they have some big
changes uh We've also had the I think
the fire dep Department come in that's a
big that's a big cost item and often
something we need to allocate
significantly capital and other
expenditures too so we we'll be looking
at that tomorrow night I think and RAM
obviously he's yeah and RAM and and the
and the AES course right I mean ram is
is big but you know it's not part of our
budget
theoretically can't change we can just
put the line he's always been kind
enough
to yeah no but it's important to hear
from them yeah you know like tomorrow
CIP meets and we are one of our agenda
item I glanced at it quickly you know is
a significant expenditure for their
turnout gear so there's a thing that's
going to be bubbling up you know and
then we're gonna we're going to be
dealing with in this budget C probably
or at least certain exp expenditure for
what turnout gear their turnout I think
it's the turnout gear Eric you correct
me if I'm wrong but it's their gearar is
the equ
want a fire their suits their their air
tanks all their apparat some of their
stuff is expiring it has a certain shelf
life um certain use life and I think
some of their stuff is
up Eric how many years will you um and
that's why I kind of like I know you
said you could get the the worksheet or
the spreadsheet rather the budget
spreadsheet to the boards maybe the
beginning of February and then we would
take a look at it and at that time if we
had questions maybe as a board we would
have a department come in if we needed
to or decide then but are you it's been
mentioned to me before so I want to make
sure how many years back will you show
us for reference on the spreadsheet will
we go a good couple years back is new
members so so one of the things I wanted
to do differently and I've already spoke
to the treasurer about it is um I've
gotten beaten up a few times over not
for providing the information in the
five parallel columns outlined in the
charter yeah the charter is very
specific we will go back to that um and
you know the part of the problem is it
requires because every year we add a few
line items sometimes subtract a few line
items and so we can't just cut and paste
columns from previous years into it so
there's actually Fair bit of
manipulation uh to do that so um but you
know that's why we have a you know a a
treasure um so yeah you will get
multiple years of data and some of you
have requested of me the previous year's
um approved Excel
spreadsheets um of the budgets that got
approved um I can give you you know five
years worth of those if you want them um
I have them
we typically done like a threeyear
rolling yeah I feel like it's been three
yeah I think it's been usually
three yeah I I would have to go back I I
pulled out the the charter and figured
out what columns they actually
request um you know and kind of
specified that so we present exactly how
the charter pulls it out um uh so
hopefully I'll stop getting beat up over
that
my recollection is we in the past we've
done the budget workups we've been
looking at threeyear averages or threee
not three average sorry three years of
experience
yeah okay thank you all right I'm gonna
propose if we don't have any other
specific questions for Eric we do have
one other agenda item which we added at
the beginning um so it might take a few
minutes we have some other things so um
there's no objections we'll move on to
6C and this is the discussion of the
request from the Board of Ed to uh uh
release $48,600 for the fuss and O'Neal
me I'm not sure what MEP is and it's
basically the mechanic electrical um
mechanical electrical PL mechanical
electrical
Plum okay thank you I have facilities
responsibility at work among a lot of
other things and I never heard it put
that way uh but any r so the the fuss
and O'Neal uh proposal is in there uh
We've also have a letter from the school
board uh from
Caitlyn um uh basically this is to in
support of the the plumbing renovation
that's required in the wing four fifth
and sixth uh grade Wing um this proposal
is for $48,600
uh full support from schematic design
through construction
Administration um so it won't be you
know the entire necessarily the entire
thing but this is uh this is the
planning this isn't the yeah planning
and management right so and and probably
review so they're asking for an
appropriation
48,600 from the a AES Capital fund for
this Capital project to kick it off it's
in that third uh paragraph that they
said yeah um and they had another bid
but it was didn't cover like it yeah um
something like it was there was a
$28,000 bid that just didn't
really and they had a successful
experience with fuss and O'Neal for
previous projects so yeah I know we use
them in my business uh from time to time
um they're uh they're one of our project
managers of record um so any you guys
had decent experience with them mark
uh
yeah I know that my engineering reviews
you know cooling that kind of thing they
have a very good reputation I would say
overall I from electrical standpoint I
know their
work when you need an expert they're
they've been been pretty successful for
us I I you know I I knew that this was
going to cost us I just kind of hoped it
would be less
than
this well this isn't even
project no this isn't um so no this is
just the
planning it's it's it's the documents
that are needed to go out to bid too
right they they will oversee the bidding
process as well they gave you stages of
what they there's like three or four
phases that they will cover this project
that I'm you know if you scroll down
there's the scope of the services and
right it's a full project management
design documents these are all part of
any standard contract for bid and that's
it describes different phases of the
entire project and what they cover so it
does construction Management's a big one
too right the construction management of
the whole they're doing this is holistic
they're doing it all could you scroll
down and which I think was the issue
with the other bid right that this Pro
this proposal covers everything and the
cheaper one didn't and that was the the
plans right contract documents is what
you actually take and use to go out to
bid with and that's what the job is
built by it's um and that has to be done
right right it it has to be done right
you know it's bidding support going out
to bid construction Administration is a
huge one this is a a very complete
package right here I I used to teach
this class on how these documents are
put together so I I can tell this is a
very very complete uh Bill be careful
what you say
mind I know where you're going with that
Mark so you know I guess they're they're
asking us to release the money from the
capital funds yeah personally am in
favor of of doing that but U I don't
know if anybody has any other I mean
comment my take my take is unless we
think this is egregiously wrong we
should go ahead and release their money
in the spirit of our policy right so I I
think
so because this is the startup of
everything happening for this number one
on priority list so yeah yeah I mean we
all know this Plumbing project problem
has been an issue for some time now
they've had bathrooms shut down in the
school now for how long now
God a year um so yeah yeah I mean my my
gut take is let's go number one number
two if everybody that has technical
expertise on this board two of you have
just weighed in and basically said yeah
this is right let's do it yeah yeah can
I make two comments sure go ahead
comment number one and I'm somewhat
biased I do like fuss and O'Neal um in
the sense that uh my my normal cycling
partner is a retired uh VP of fuss and
O'Neal um and one of my other guys I'm
going on vacation ran fuss and O'Neal's
New Hampshire and
operations um I've had fuss and O'Neal
bid on a bunch of stuff on the town
honestly I've never chosen them because
they are an
expensive contractor not saying they're
not high quality they are they do
excellent work um so I guess it's just a
question of whether I I mean I would not
hire them for the town's perspective but
maybe it's appropriate for the school
that that's kind of your judgment um the
other bid from AZ
engineering was I don't know whether the
school got any other bids this is the
only one they showed me um the contract
documents and scope of
work uh
for AZ engineering was I think
$199,000 so you're that doesn't have
constru management right on that one um
Eric is that
true management involved it was
so limited construction management in
terms of they would they this agreement
got you completely through the bid
walkth through the development of the
art rfps help in selecting the
contractor um but this is a little firm
um it's not a this is a three-person
operation not fuss and O'Neal um which
is a you know a really large operation
that just bought a shiny new building in
Hartford so um pluses and minuses to
both I am not opposed to you selecting
but just realize that you're you're
paying
for
um you know you're paying for a really
good contract
but you're also paying a premium to get
it and so just as long as you understand
that then you know that's not a
bad yeah I'd be happy to
work that way as going you know going
forward uh a company like fuss O'Neal
you're probably not going to run into
issues down the road I don't know I'll
leave it I'll leave it at that I just
think getting I feel like there was
something oh go ahead I just think
there's peace of mind going with a
company like th and O'Neal yeah that you
might not get with a small firm like a
but I I've never dealt with a I don't
know them at all my my only concern is
whether the two bids are apples to
apples that's all I wanted to say Rob
they're not app to Apples this this
isn't my expertise so I'm gonna sit back
but Caitlyn aware of saying that there
was something in the plans I don't have
it called up on my screen that maybe was
lacking in the the less expensive quote
whereas I feel like the um she said
something like and that was maybe I I
wish I had it in front of me I had it I
had it up it was like $28,000 difference
for this the or a percentage of the
plans were not included it says the
language she has in her letter is after
careful consideration we determined that
failed to provide many things such as
architectural plans thank you plans are
estimated to about 60% of the cost so
yeah it's not an apple samples yeah so
that's my isue is if if it was just a
question of big big firm with great
reputation and small
firm I don't know but if it's not Apples
to Apples if if it's hard to evaluate it
especially for somebody like me who has
zero expertise in this area I am so
deferring to anybody here who knows this
stuff because I don't I'm I'm but a
humble history major who
doesn't I would think that we would also
defer to the Judgment of the Board of
Education this is these are their faults
that they really felt like they could
get away and save some money I'm
assuming that they would do that yeah
Ian we saw something egregious in there
like you know then I would be a little
more concerned um but you know they've
they've made the Judgment it looks it
looks reasonable to me I I think that we
defer to their judgment on this as long
as we don't think it's you know
completely
outlandish that's my take so I guess the
The Next Step would be that uh I could
move that we so
we appr you know we release the money
48,600 from the capital fund right so uh
all right go I'll go ahead and make that
motion I will move that we uh in
accordance with the request for the
Board of
Education appropriate $48,600
uh for this particular Capital project
or rather the engineering for this
Capital project uh as per the request
that we've
received a second I'll second that okay
Bill we have further
discussion all those in favor say I hi
hi hi any
opposed anybody
abstaining okay hearing none passes
unanimously thank you
cool okay um so I guess that takes us to
our next agenda item which is item seven
board open discussion is there anything
else that the board members would like
to
discuss I already mentioned mine um you
know CIP beating is tomorrow night uh
I've gotten a heads up just based on the
you know packet and everything that we
have some stuff coming down the pike
from the fire department um for some
expenditure so just FYI I really just
quickly glanced at it Eric could
probably tell you the exact figures but
it looked like about a quarter million
dollars uh worth of turnout gear and
stuff like that oh I wait till wait till
after we have firm information so yeah
but just FYI we'll be talking about this
tomorrow night and then our next meeting
we'll take it up for
real okay good thank you anybody have
anything
else
none okay we'll move on agenda item
eight which is
correspondence um I think all the
correspondence that I've gotten is
either stuff that Joanne has distributed
to all of us I think and then there was
the stuff from kayn uh that came in
about the fuss and O'Neal proposal for
the bathroom remodeling I forwarded all
that to you uh anybody have anything
else okay we move on to agenda item nine
which is public speak we do not appear
to have any members of the public
here get my hand out of the way except
pushing the buttons there's nobody
okay uh so I guess we'll move on to
adjournment maybe i' like to make the
motion to adj
yes
Bill hey
Bill I'll second it okay Kimberly
seconds thank you that's one I saw
anyway all right any
discussion no no all those in favor say
I I he
opposed any
abstentions all right thank you very
much everybody long meeting for December
try to
keep
your everybody else great holiday and a
great New Year Eric as always we'll be
in touch thank you Eric no worries bye
bye